---
layout: post
title: 'Its Complicated; or<br>"Why does my Comcast internet suck?"'
published: False
date: 2017-01-21 17:00:00
mathjax: False
keywords:
  [
    convex analysis,
    convex,
    analysis,
    extreme points,
    polytope,
    polyhedra,
    polyhedron,
    andréasson,
  ]
desc: Why the Telecommunications Industry seems unfairly anticompetitive, why that's a good thing, and why Comcast still sucks.
---

### As of January 2017,

many Americans seem to have a negative view of their cable company. Indeed, the current state of the cable industry is anticompetitive and its services in the United States are slower than other first-world countries (Akamai, 2013). The entrenchment of only a few ISPs in the market is an unintended consequence of the Telecommunications Act of 1996. Slow speeds are a result of internet infrastructure built with 20th century materials. Questionable practices such as throttled content and hypothetical violations of Network Neutrality add to the ire towards these companies. And currently the two biggest ISPs in America, Comcast and Time Warner Cable, seek permission from the Federal Trade Commission to merge. This paper attempts to elaborate on the multivariable equation that is the American cable industry and explore how and why the industry is anticompetitive.

This is an essay I wrote back in College. I have edited it significantly, although the message and context is still the same. While taking potshots at Comcast seems to be a fad these past few days, I still attempted to paint a very neutral and critical look at the cable/dsl battle of the early 2000's. Comcast is a company whose behavior and decisions are driven like _a company_, and this has helped them succeed. In my honest opinion, Comcast behaves like any other typical (successful) business. The laws of government, the constraints of utility economics, and even the physics and engineering of delivering high speed internet are all components Comcast has successfully (and in my opinion, correctly) wielded to become a national behemoth.

Comcast earned their success in the mid 90's. But they haven't earned anything since. Comcast is relying on an aging coaxial infrastructure. They are actively ignoring an exodus of customers to new competitors in both their television and cable internet product spaces. Internet may be called a utility by the FCC, but it's not regulated or maintained as one. I predict Comcast's charter of deregulation, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, will be the same force that will defeat them. As a regional monopoly, they are unstoppable. But as soon as a competitor locks in a Fiber charter in a community, Comcast customers are quick to cancel membership.

I believe Comcast isn't asleep at the wheel. Their executives knows what happening; they have seen the storm clouds on the horizon, and they have battered down the hatches. They will fail excruciatingly, but not before wringing their customers for as much as they can comfortably charge.

This paper seeks to give an explanation for the current state of American internet access. It will first focus on technical aspects that facilitate the transmission of data, and explain why American internet connectivity speeds are slower than other first-world countries. The paper will then go on to explain why the cable industry is anticompetitive, and how the utilitarian aspects of internet access and lobbying efforts prevent meaningful competition. The paper continues with an analysis of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, elaborating on how federal policymaking shaped the early development of the modern internet infrastructure. A discussion on Bittorrent throttling and Network Neutrality, two closely linked tangential issues that drive negative opinions towards the companies follows.

By the end of this paper, I hope to provide a better understanding of the American cable industry and give a rational explanation for the slower internet speeds and higher prices. While the industry is anti-competitive, the companies are not “evil” or set to gouge their customers, and are actually in a delicate state of responsibility to customers, municipalities and other software-oriented companies that rely on them. The market is in a considerable state of flux, and the relevancy of this paper is likely short-lived. If any conclusion is taken away from the ideas presented forth, it would be that the issue is not simple, and no immediate panacea exists.

It’s complicated.

### Introduction

The internet is a relatively recent technological advancement that has significantly shaped the development of the 21st century. Access to the internet is touted as a fundamental right, yet demands an infrastructure as complex and sprawling as electricity grids to properly function. At its creation, the internet was slow and shaky; uptime was not guaranteed and connection speeds were measured in kilobytes. Today, speeds travel in gigabytes and 100% network uptime is expected.

How is internet access delivered? There is not one explicit internet infrastructre. An average new yorker has four ways to access the internet:

- Through DSL lines delivered from existing landline infrastructures
- Through Coaxial lines delivered through existing cable infrastructures
- Wirelessly over 4G, delivered through the wireless phone network
- Via Fiber optic cables,

There are multiple mediums to access the internet because of the Telecommunications Act of 1996. This legislation allowed communication companies to horizontally integrate, and compete in each others’ domains. The economic theory suggested if most communities had a telephone and television provider, and if internet connectivity could be provided by both existing infrastructures, then market deregulation would immediately incite competition. This idea made sense: internet access, Telephony and cable television could all be delivered through DSL and Cable infrastrucres, and most cities already had at least two of these. Future infrastructures could also be built that could deliver these services. By deregulating telephone companies and allowing them to compete in delivering simmilar services, competition would be inciting across the country, and services would improve.

This prediction came true, but it would not last. Cable internet trounced Digital Subscriber Line internet in terms of access speed and throughput, and the price of connectivity has only gone up. Today, America ranks eighth in the world for access speeds, despite paying more than twice what South Korea, the number one country, pays.

In spite of the high demand for high-speed internet access, American internet Service Providers (ISPs) are viewed negatively and disliked (Honan, 2011). The relative high price of internet connectivity and “unacceptably” slow speeds perpetuate discontent, and demand for better connectivity options is rarely acknowledged.

### Copper Plated Origins

Internet connectivity is made by a physical connection from the internet backbone to the ISP’s data centers, and eventually to the destination. The modern materials used to accomplish this task are the same materials telephone and television companies have used to deliver their respective utilities. Copper based coaxial cables and high-voltage telephone lines are not the proper materials to send large quantities of data back-and-forth, as they were developed with different intended uses (FiberForAll, 2012). Comparatively slower American internet speeds stem from the use of these materials.

As of June 2013, South Korea enjoys the fastest internet speeds in the world, in contrast to America ranking eighth. The typical South Korean download speed was 13.3 mbps at an average price of $29 a month, in contrast to America’s 8.7 mbps at a price of  $45 a month (Akamai, 2013). When considering Dollar per mbps, Americans pay more than twice what South Koreans pay for half as fast a connection.

The current infrastructure used to provide homes with internet connectivity is part of why America lags behind South Korea in internet connectivity. The comparatively high prices and low connection speed of American home internet stems from ISPs delivering internet connectivity through their existing telecommunications infrastructure. Data coming to-and-from an ISP to someone’s home is typically delivered either through the existing phone lines (DSL) or through the television’s coaxial cable.

A Digital Subscriber Line uses the existing copper wire of the phone line to deliver high speed internet access. These connections are weaker the further away the connection is made from the main telephone line, and tend to be slower than cable internet. In contrast, cable internet does not lose signal quality with distance to the line (FiberForAll, 2012). Because coaxial networks are not on a dedicated line, a neighborhood shares a common cable connection for internet access. As a result, a neighbor's heavy internet use can influence a home’s connectivity. Coaxial cables must also be buried, because the high voltages of telephone lines can interfere with the signal.

The existing infrastructure of phone and television companies enables these two models of internet connectivity. Contrast this to how most South Koreans get their connectivity: via fiber optic cables. A fiber connection is provided directly by a long connection of fiber glass, with data transmitted as bursts of light across the cables fibers. Because these cables contain no metal conductivity and use no electricity, fiber does not have to be buried far underground to prevent interference with other high voltage electrical components. Wiring a new home with fiber optic cable is significantly easier and faster than wiring a home with a cable connection. Per foot, fiber is significantly more expensive than coaxial cables, but per dollar per foot per mbps, it is far more cost effective (Wikipedia, 2014)

South Korea’s government subsidized its cable companies to lay fiber, resulting in faster internet speeds (McDonald, 2011). In addition, South Korea is a geographically smaller region compared to the United States with its population concentrated in a few large cities, reducing the extensive infrastructure stress demanded of the company. For this reason Seoul can boast average internet speeds of 100 mbps (McDonald, 2011). South Korea enjoys a fundamentally faster internet infrastructure because it made the conscientious effort to embrace fiber as a means of internet connectivity, rather than building internet access on top of existing telephone and television infrastructure.

AT&T, Verizon and Google are beginning to lay fiber cable to American homes in select communities, but development has been slow and the market nigh-impenetrable. Because of the rarity and high demand for faster internet, a fiber connection typically sells for ~\$70 a month, more than 150% of the typical American price for internet connectivity. The high price of fiber and the lack of infrastructure development is a result of municipal monopolies and entrenched telecommunications conglomerates (Crawford, 2013). This point is further elaborated on in the next section.

At the internet's inception, coaxial and DSL connections were the only economically sensible means of connectivity, and both could be offered by existing telecoms through their established infrastructure. The internet would not have emerged as recently if telecoms did not offer connectivity through their wires. Fiber connectivity only recently became economically viable, and cable companies are reluctant in adopting fiber because it remains economical to gradually upgrade coaxial networks than to rewire regional markets with fiber.

Slow internet speeds are a result of an internet infrastructure built with the wrong materials, on top of an infrastructure built with a different intended use. The data capacity of copper coaxial cables is not suited for the demands of the 21st century. When a cable company such as Comcast or Time Warner Cable upgrades municipal network speeds, they continue to use coaxial cables to support their network, resulting in infrastructure that grows slowly and expensively. As the price of fiber optic cables decreases ISPs may become more inclined to switch, but for now it remains the defining impediment to a meaningful internet infrastructure.

### Internet as a Utility

Currently Comcast, Time Warner Cable and Cox Communications are the three largest ISPs in the United States. These companies, despite their size and market power, lack the incentive to compete at a local level in the realm of cable telecommunications. (Honan, 2011) Startup cable companies cannot hope to enter the market due to redtape and existing regional monopolies. All of this behavior obeys established microeconomic theories regarding the effectiveness of natural monopolies as municipal utilities. I contend that because internet connectivity requires a high fixed cost to build a sound infrastructure, like other utilities, internet connectivity is a utility itself, and should thrive in an environment free of competition.

Before a demand for internet connectivity existed, cable companies selling television connections gerrymandered the regional United States into separate regional monopolies. A cable company would enter an area and offer to wire the municipality in exchange for a franchising monopoly for a set number of years (Honan, 2011). This was a familiar procedure for local municipalities. Similar deals were brokered by electrical and telephone companies before, because these companies sold utilities (Yglesias, 2013). These deals incite quick infrastructure development and long-term revenues for the companies.

Electrical and telephone line must be laid once and rarely (if ever) significantly upgraded. Economists call this a “fixed cost”, because it is a high price to initially wire a community, but that cost only has to be paid once. (Bolick, 1984) The “marginal cost” of adding another home to the network is comparatively low, and the “variable cost” of providing the service is a function of recurring costs to the utility. In theory, the variable cost of a natural monopoly should dictate the price of service (BusinessDictionary, 2014), but this is not the case for cable internet.

Demand for ever faster internet speeds requires expansive infrastructure development. Because cable companies use coaxial cables, the upgrades to the infrastructure do not last as long as they should, and infrastructure upgrades are soon rescheduled, making infrastructure upgrades a high “variable cost”, rather than part of the fixed cost that should have paid when the infrastructure was initially built (Mitchell, 2013). The result is a “captive market”, in which homeowners and businesses have two choices for internet connectivity: their phone company or their television company (BusinessDictionary, 2014) By the nature of the product and it’s delivery, internet access is a utility, and should benefit in a market with as little competition as possible. Compare internet access to other utilities: the effectiveness of power grids and sewer systems is that a community only needs one of each. The necessity and effectiveness of municipal monopolies for utilities should in theory provide benefits to consumers. This does not occur with ISPs because the fixed cost of building a sound long-term internet infrastructure was never paid; instead ISPs fund infrastructure upgrades as a variable cost and compensate by raising the prices of their services.

The microeconomic theory of natural monopolies does not hold empirically for ISPs (Quijano and Quijano, 2007). These companies sell a product that is not designed to be competitive. Internet access from Comcast is the same access offered by Time Warner Cable. Geographic variables may influence speeds or access quality, but ultimately the product is improved when the market is anticompetitive, just as it was designed when cable companies began wiring communities in the 50’s (Yglesias, 2013). The theory doesn’t hold because a solid internet infrastructure was never built in the first place (Quijano and Quijano, 2007). Yes, the market is anticompetitive, but it never should have been competitive in the first place.

A counterpoint that must be addressed; if the microeconomic theory should hold for telecommunications utilities (such as ISPs), why would breaking up the Bell operating companies (a utility and national monopoly) be necessary? The answer is because there is a distinction between a natural monopoly and a national monopoly. A natural monopoly is the aforementioned special status granted to utilities that gives them sole operational control over a community, whereas a national monopoly is a single provider of a product or service for the entire nation (Quijano and Quijano, 2007). The Bell operating companies were all owned by AT&T, which had a control over long distance communications networks and was the sole telephone provider for most of the contiguous United States. This paper argues for smaller, municipal monopolies with many competitors in the national market.

This does not mean there is not a problem with the state of the American internet infrastructure. Prices are high because infrastructure upgrades are a variable cost. These upgrades occur because coaxial cables are the primary means of data connectivity. Speeds are slow because coaxial cables are the incumbent materials of data transmission. Complaints about the anticompetitive market are misdirected; it’s anticompetitive because internet is offered by television and phone companies, existing utility companies that function better as natural monopolies.

###Google Fiber
In March of 2011, Google announced that they had selected the residents of Kansas City, Kansas as the first recipients of its own high speed internet/television service, called Google Fiber. Google chose Kansas City because the existing cable company, Time Warner Cable, was too behind in the infrastructure development to compete aggressively (Canon, 2014). Google Fiber offers gigabyte-per-second internet speeds, in contrast to the national average internet speeds of 5.5 megabit-per-second speeds, for roughly the same price as other cable companies charged for bundled services (Canon, 2014). By directly wiring communities with fiber optic cable, Google can provide faster internet access than incumbent ISPs. Google chose Kansas City because its municipalities cut as much redtape and threw away construction wait periods (Canon 2014). Google had the initial capital, and the incumbent rule did not intend to fight.

Google’s entry into the market as an ISP was an immensely calculated and safe move by a very forward tech company. Google worked with existing utilities and AT&T to gain access to utility poles without having to pay high fees (HiggenBotham, 2012). The company used social engineering campaigns and grassroots rallying before ever dispatching technicians to extend fiber to homes (HiggenBotham, 2012). In addition, the tech giant built its own network connection hardware, so the fiber connection would connect to Google proprietary hardware that functioned as a DVR, TV box and in-home router. (HiggenBotham, 2012).

As of the first quarter of 2014, Google fiber is not yet profitable. Its financial existence is only mentioned once in one press release maintained by Google’s Investor Relations (Page, 2009), and is not explicitly named in any balance sheets. During the public 2013 google earnings conference call, Bernstein’s research analyst, Carlos Kirjner asked Google CEO, Larry Page the following:

> How do you expect fiber to have a major impact, given that it would take many billions and several years to pass something like 20 million U.S. homes — and after all of that time and money, you would be at best a mid-sized provider, in a market that accounts for less than half of your current business?

To Which Larry Page and CFO Patrick Pichette responded:

> We look for places where we can provide products that make a really big difference in people’s lives, and we can make a lot of money. The reason we’ve been so successful at advertising is we view that as another source of information. The better job we can do at providing you information, the better we can provide commercial information to you… When you wait for three seconds to get your YouTube video today with your current provider, that is a terrible answer. We think that fiber, and the services we offer in Kansas City today actually goes a long way to solving a lot of today’s frustrations, independent of tomorrow’s. (Google, 2013)

Google’s advertising revenues rely on ISPs to deliver a fast internet. Google Fiber is an R&D project to eliminate the middle-man (ISPs) by means of vertical integration and providing internet access directly to consumers. Kirjner and Page/Pichette both offer solid arguments. Kirjner explains that Google cannot hope to immediately impact the cable market, let alone incite strong competition against the incumbent regional monopolies of ISPs. Page/Pichette offer a counterpoint: Google has a financial incentive to try, and the expenses of trying are negligible to the gains found in faster internet access and vertically integrated product space (Gannes, 2013).

On February 19th, 2014, Google announced that it would be expanding its fiber services to more metro cities around the United States (Medin, 2014). Candidate cities that complete a checklist of infrastructure surveys and redtape clearing would be eligible to receive Google Fiber in the coming months. Entry into the ISP market is difficult, so Google will rely on communities that actively work to support a Fiber charter before considering an entry into the regional market. Google must endure a high net operating loss just for a fraction of the ISP market share.

All of this emerges from the function of internet access as a utility. Google intends to pay the high fixed-cost of establishing a fiber infrastructure. Nonetheless, this makes for multiple competitors in a regional market, both selling the same utility. While the products sold by TWC and Google are inherently different, the cost effectiveness of either company to sell their product is diminished by the other’s presence in the municipality. This is the key point I want to make: **Telecommunications Service Providers can only compete in similar service spaces with different high cost infrastructures.**

### The 1996 Telecommunications Act

The Telecommunications Act of 1996 marked the latest major overhaul to telecommunications laws in recent history. The law’s impact on the telecommunication market sparked rapid internet infrastructure growth by deregulating the market and providing incentives for cable companies to offer internet connectivity (NCTA, 2014) But for all of the successes championed by the law, many failures of the ISP market can be relate directly the law. Triumphs of the Law are shadowed by the tenets of Title II of the act along with the disintegration of common-carrier status for telecoms offering internet access.

The Telecommunications act was conceived after the breakup of the Bell Operating Companies, which left the telecommunications markets in a state of nonaction. The breakup did not induce competition into the market as expected: American consumers still had only one telephone company to obtain service from because the “Baby Bells” that emerged were regional monopolies of their parents (Hedge, 2013). Media Scholar and Law Professor Susan Crawford’s book Captive Audience, describes the intentions of the Act handily:

The 1996 act set up a grand bargain: it tried to force competition into all telecommunications markets while also deregulating them. The Bells had to give smaller companies access to their [infrastructure], and the cable companies had to allow the Bells to compete with them for cable service… the theory was stiffer competition from telephone companies (now in the video business) would constrain rates.

The prediction was that with the emergence of a new communication technology (Internet access), competition could be had between municipal monopolies that offered the same service. Even a company with a municipal monopoly over cable would still compete with telephone and other companies. The existence of multiple deregulated platforms would reduce the price of connectivity and incite innovation (Crawford, 2013).

The 1996 Act made a distinction between communications services, classifying them as either “telecommunications services” or “information services”. A telecommunications service and an information service company were subject to different regulations by the law. Among these regulations, Telecommunications services were garnished with a common-carrier status. This meant a telecommunications services company could not alter the content of delivered network data or deny the transfer of the data (NCTA, 2014). For example, a phone call transmits a callers voice from one point to another without changing the content of the voice message. Common carrier status is often relegated to shipping or airline companies; a shipping company cannot deny paying customers for any reason, and are absolved of culpability only through acts of nature, shipping fraud, public enemies or inherent defects of the shipped goods. In addition, telecommunications services are required to sell network access to the public. This meant competing ISP’s could use a telecommunications service companies’ infrastructure to deliver internet connectivity (Boahs-Mensah, 2014).

Title II of the Act was the aforementioned deregulation of the market. Existing radio, television and telephone companies could now horizontally integrate and compete in each others’ domains. The prediction municipal monopolies would become competitive held up briefly, until the advantages of coaxial cables over DSL connections became more evident. This failure was compounded by a regulatory conundrum: was internet access via cable analogous to high-speed internet over the phone, and therefore in need of common-carriage regulations? And if the two services were indistinguishable, why should they be regulated in different ways? (Crawford, 2014)

This regulatory inconsistency would eventually ferment into the 2005 Supreme Court case National Cable & Telecommunications Association v. Brand X internet Services. The court ruled 6-3 that cable companies providing internet access are information services companies, and therefore ISPs are not subject to common-carriage laws. The court cited the significant ambiguity of horizontally integrated ISPs and the vagueness of the law. Because of the reclassification, ISPs do not have to share infrastructure, a factor that now only compounds the difficulty of entry into the ISP market.

The different regulation of DSL and cable internet, combined with the coaxial advantage and the classification of ISPs as information services set the stage for the modern ISP market. Municipalities grant separate monopolies for television and phone companies, but the phone companies cannot provide an internet access as fast as cable. The deregulation allowed the “Baby Bells” to merge with existing companies, limiting the number of overall competitors in the national market. (Boahs-Mensah, 2014) The act encouraged companies to horizontally integrate, paving the way for “bundled packages”. Horizontal integration raised regulatory inconsistencies, which gave telecommunications companies legal footholds to later strike down Network Neutrality laws.

All in all, the law did more good than bad. The deregulation encouraged innovation and growth on part of the telecommunications companies, and it helped keep the internet pleasantly deregulated. Its greatest failure was not giving consistent common-carriage regulation to companies that needed it. This aspect, and the subsequent Supreme Court ruling has made entry into the ISP market extremely challenging, and is the cause of much wasteful infrastructure overlap (Boahs-Mensah, 2014).

### Bittorrent and P2P

    In the fall of 2007, many Comcast users began to notice a drop in connection speeds, specifically when sharing files over Bittorrent, an internet protocol that allows for the transfer of large files without hosting or streaming services (Crawford, 2012). Bittorrent works by cutting large files into pieces and allowing other users (referred to as peers) to host separate copies of the data that, in turn, could be efficiently streamed to other peers. Controlled experiments by Network Analyst, Robb Topolski, and the EFF discovered that use of Bittorrent connections made on Comcast’s network were actively being disrupted by the ISP (EFF, 2007). Packets of data sent between peers were being interlaced with TCP-RST (transmission control protocol reset) packets, data identifiers indicating the other end of the stream had disconnected.
    Topolski published his findings in the Associated Press, which ran in contradiction to press statements made by Comcast earlier that month (EFF, 2007). The story became sensational; Comcast was caught in a lie with Network Neutrality implications, and Bittorrent users with the technical know-how could actively witness the data disruption.
    The FCC responded by denouncing Comcast’s actions, but imposed no injunctions on the company. Instead, the FCC insisted Comcast promise to adopt a protocol-agnostic method of network management by 2008 (Crawford, 2013). Rather than complying with the FCC’s order, Comcast sued. After the 2005 NCTA vs Brand X supreme court ruling, the FCC had no legal basis to regulate Comcast’s network management, and Comcast did not want to justify it’s network management practices to an FCC commission. As an act of goodwill, Comcast pledged to abide by the order as the legal process played out (Anderson, 2008). In 2010, Comcast would win the case, asserting its deregulated authority before the FCC.
    Comcast was throttling the data as a network management protocol, so as to decrease traffic throughput across its internet infrastructure. Comcast lied about interfering with Bittorrent traffic to avoid accusations of violating Network Neutrality principles. This was an imprudent move by Comcast for two critical reasons.
    For one, Comcast specifically throttled Bittorrent peering traffic as a means of addressing excessive internet demands. Unable to keep up with increasing demands of an internet infrastructure, Comcast intentionally throttled peering traffic to discourage internet use. Although such network management is necessary for any ISP at times of peak usage, it nonetheless remains a symptom of ISPs improper use of coaxial cables to deliver data.

More importantly however, it meant Comcast was trying to avoid accusations of violating Network Neutrality principles, and protocol-specific throttling dangerously toed this line. As the next section will discuss, violating Network Neutrality principles looks terrible in the eyes of the public, and can be easily misconstrued to suggest an ISP intentionally filters specific web content.
Indeed, Comcast did lie to their customers and the press regarding their network management policies. US Senator Al Franken enumerated this point, among many others, in his open letter to the Department of Justice in contention to the announced merger between Comcast and TWC (Franken 2014). This PR move by Comcast poisoned the well for other ISPs that might attempt to throttle specific web content.

### Network Neutrality

    In 2010, the FCC approved a set of rules, dictating that all ISPs could not favor certain web content over others. The FCC Open internet Order of 2010 was sought after fears that ISPs with control over internet access would intentionally favor certain content over others. These rules were created to prevent ISPs from “unreasonably discriminating” legal web content.
    Network Neutrality prohibits a specific marketable product from being sold by ISPs: tiered networks. A tiered network would give higher priority to content whose providers pay for the expedited access. This “illegal” product violates of the spirit of Network Neutrality. Advocates for Network Neutrality argue that tiered networks would slow innovation of online companies, and would give an unfair advantage to companies that could afford priority internet traffic. Opponents of Network Neutrality argue the FCC rules discourage infrastructure investment by giving no financial incentive for ISPs to expand broadband networks.

If tiered networks were offered by ISPs it would be at the detriment of startup web companies, because incumbent web companies would have the capital to pay ISPs for priority traffic, putting startups at a disadvantage. Nonetheless, tiered networks might benefit the national internet infrastructure. Tiered Networks might incentivize ISPs to upgrade their networks to provide an accelerated service for paying content. High-traffic content providers, such as Netflix or Facebook, can achieve the same benefits by setting up Content Delivery Networks, but then the ISP looses their incentive to continue to upgrade their internet backbone. In this regard, tiered networks are unlikely to gain momentum.
Another argument for Network Neutrality is perhaps more inflammatory; a cable company could potentially “throttle” content, or intentionally slow data. This could be in the form of competitors’ apps, or Wikipedia articles if the ISP is so draconic. It is this fear that makes the Network Neutrality arguments so important; if a cable company throttles specific legal web content, it becomes wholly anticompetitive and a First-Amendment rights issue.
On January 14th 2014, Federal Appeals courts struck down the Open internet Order. The court claimed the FCC lacked the authority to enforce the order. In the specifics of Verizon vs FCC, the court struck down the laws’ anti-discrimination and anti-blocking policies (the central tenets of the Open internet Order). Although portions of the law remain in place, it has otherwise been defanged (Brodkin, 2014).
The Open internet Order collapsed because the ISPs were not classified as common carriers after the NCTA vs Brand X supreme court ruling. While common carriers have no authority to refuse or discriminate the transport of content (data), as long as fees are paid and bandwidth is available, Verizon, Comcast and the like were reclassified as information service companies by the ruling. These companies now have legal authority to discriminate against which data they deliver.
From the perspective of Network Neutrality proponents, absent Network Neutrality laws appear terrifying. From the perspective of a cable company however, the absence of these law do not incentivize the company into violating these principles. Shortly after the laws were struck down, Netflix submitted it’s 2013 earnings report to shareholders. Besides announcing a \$48 million dollar profit and a positive outlook, Netflix included a statement on the ruling:

> Unfortunately, Verizon successfully challenged the U.S. net neutrality rules. In principle, a domestic ISP now can legally impede the video streams that members request from Netflix, degrading the experience we jointly provide. The motivation could be to get Netflix to pay fees to stop this degradation. Were this draconian scenario to unfold with some ISP, we would vigorously protest and encourage our members to demand the open internet they are paying their ISP to deliver.

The most likely case, however, is that ISPs will avoid this consumer-unfriendly path of discrimination. ISPs are generally aware of the broad public support for net neutrality and don’t want to galvanize government action. (Netflix, 2014)
The Netflix earnings report summarizes the danger (and lack thereof) of absent Network Neutrality laws. ISPs now have the ability and legal authority to discriminate against data and provide a tiered network. But, if they do, the public backlash might invoke further restrictions on the cable company. Government regulation is a strong disincentive of the cable industry, and tiered networks cannot promise enough income to negate the ill-will of breaking Network Neutrality principles.
The Comcast/Bittorrent debacle and the strike-down of the Open internet Order both highlight the FCC’s lack of authority in regulating Cable Companies. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 deregulated the cable companies hoping to spark competition. Instead ISPs have cited the law and the NCTA vs. Brand X Supreme Court case to justify their exemption from FCC authority.
This all ties back to ISP’s losing their classification as common carriers. A common carrier has no right to discriminate web traffic, making Comcast legally culpable for throttling bittorrent users in 2007. The Open internet Order would remain intact, and ISPs would have to abide by the principles of Network Neutrality (Brodkin 2014). This outcome was in the spirit of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but not in its letter.

### Conclusion

With many laws, it is difficult to conceive of the long term consequences, especially on the advent of new technologies. The 1996 Telecommunications Act did not foresee the domination of the ISP market by coaxial cable wielding telecoms, and the subsequent deregulation and horizontal integration created an ISP market with ambiguous legal labels. The 2005 Supreme Court case NCTA vs. Brand X stripped ISPs of common-carrier status, further impeding startup entry into the ISP market. The demand for improved access exceeds ISP’s abilities to upgrade their regional networks, a result of outdated incumbent infrastructure materials still used to maintain those networks. The result is seemingly slow service for a high price, offered by either a massive television conglomerate or by a massive phone conglomerate.

It becomes easy to vilify these companies, especially without other competition to be had. Millions of Americans depend on internet access as a means of information, entertainment, work and education, and they may perceive the ISP’s high prices and poor service as a failure on part of the company. And when no other options for internet access can be found, poor service is perceived as a failure of the market itself.

This rationale is expected of any industry or product, and America's demand for increased competition between ISPs is not illogical. But the reality is complex, made only more confusing when tasked with classifying internet access as a product. This paper assumes internet access is a utility, and the calculus changes when this is no longer the case. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 perceived internet access as a service, conveniently capable of being offered by two existing telecoms.

With certainty, I want to say Congress made the rational decision with the data known at the time. The 1996 Act expected better services from telecoms by inciting competition. This prediction failed, I believe, because Congress mistook internet access as a marketable service. Why exactly the prediction failed requires a more thorough understanding of microeconomics and telecoms than I can deliver. Nonetheless, I maintain that internet access is a utility, and I hold this axiom as the foundation for my arguments.

The sordid issue is complicated, and possible solutions vary. Congress could break up the cable companies, but that will do the same thing breaking up the Bells did; the companies would merge back together, maintain their regional monopolies, and no significant change is had in the long-term. Breaking up the Bells did eliminate a national monopoly, but competition didn’t emerge from the breakup.

Congress could let Comcast and TWC merge on the condition they begin to retrofit fiber networks into their existing infrastructure. Comcast is currently in negotiations for the merger, and a decision depends on approval from congress. Now would be the time to demand concessions of Comcast in exchange for a much-treasured merger. However, Comcast has a track-record of not following-up with promises made before congress (Franken, 2014), and this only makes Comcast a monopoly controlling a national utility, the same scenario AT&T was in when congress mandated the break-up of the Bells.
Subsidies could be given to cable companies working to build fiber networks, similar to what South Korea did to encourage its internet infrastructure. However convincing taxpayers cable companies need subsidies is a hard pill to swallow, and the funds to encourage that investment are likely hard to come across. Federal Grants could be given to municipalities who seek to build their own local fiber networks instead. However, considering the current demand for Fiber access, this solution is far more costly and unfeasible.
These solutions have something in common: they demand action, laws and legislation, and expect competition to emerge as a result. But, if internet connectivity is to be perceived as a utility in the future, it will require an environment free of competition, municipal franchises and regulated prices. National competition between ISPs has never been achieved because the nature of the product is not meant to be competitive.
I conclude this paper with my own radical solution, which is significantly different than the aforementioned solutions, and will likely take years to fully realize. Barring unforeseen circumstances, this solution may soon address slow speeds in major cities, and realize unparalleled access and reduced costs for internet connectivity in the long-term.

- It is in the FCC's best interest to ensure that if Telecommunications companies are to enjoy their deregulated charters, that they compete fairly offering their services through their distinct infrastructures. Comcast's coaxials can only compete with Verizon's cellular network, with Centurylink's DSL, with Google's Fiber. They can all offer similar services through their distinct infrastructures. Each product requires a high fixed-cost infrastructure that can only be built once. Unfair competition will prevent cities from expanding their telecommunications services. If the spirit and intent of the Telecommunications act of 1996 is to remain, the FCC must make sure communities are not illegally coerced into denying companies seeking to compete in

The Solution
Let the market naturally find its way towards fiber networks. The price of fiber optic cable is decreasing each year, and in time, it will become more economical for cable companies to build a standalone internet infrastructure from fiber rather than upgrading networks with coaxial cables. Attempts to regulate the market (such as breaking up the Bells) or deregulating the market (the Telecommunications Act of 1996) only worsened the problem. Letting the market naturally find it’s way to a reliable fiber infrastructure will take time, but it can realize faster connectivity speeds in the short term, and lower costs in the long term. The longer cable companies delay this shift, the more new competitors will emerge seeking to build their own reliable fiber networks.
Its simple.

References
{% highlight text %}
Akamai. (2013, Summer). Internet Penetration. The State of The internet, 6, 12-14. Retrieved February 24, 2013, from http://www.akamai.com/dl/documents/akamai_soti_q213.pdf?WT.mc_id=soti_Q213
Anderson, N. (2008, September 4). Comcast sues FCC, wants P2P throttling order overturned. Ars Technica. Retrieved April 9, 2014, from http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2008/09/comcast-sues-fcc-wants-p2p-throttling-order-overturned/
Bolick, C. (1984, March 13). Cable Television: An Unnatural Monopoly. Cato Institute. Retrieved March 31, 2014, from http://www.cato.org/pubs/pas/pa034.html
Brodkin, J. (2014, January 14). ArsTechnica. Ars Technica. Retrieved April 9, 2014, from http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2014/01/net-neutrality-is-half-dead-court-strikes-down-fccs-anti-blocking-rules/
Canon, S. (2014, February 19). Google Fiber says it might expand from KC to nine new markets. KansasCity.com. Retrieved April 2, 2014, from http://www.kansascity.com/2014/02/19/4832748/google-fiber-could-expand-from.html
Captive Market. (2014) BusinessDictionary.com. Retrieved March 19, 2014, from http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/captive-market.html
Crawford, S. (2013). Regulatory Pendulum. Captive Audience: The Telecom Industry and Monopoly Power in the New Gilded Age (pp. 49-55). New Haven, Conneticut: Yale University Press.
Crawford, S. (2008, July 13). Big Cable’s Sauron-Like Plan for One Infrastructure to Rule Us All. Wired. Retrieved March 31, 2014, from http://www.wired.com/opinion/2013/07/big-cables-plan-for-one-infrastructure-to-rule-us-all/
Evans, B. (2014, March 5). Shared infrastructure key to internet growth. Business & Financial Times. Retrieved April 6, 2014, from http://www.thebftonline.com/content/shared-infrastructure-key-internet-growth-google-head
EFF. (2007, October 19). EFF tests agree with AP: Comcast is forging packets to interfere with user traffic | Electronic Frontier Foundation. Electronic Frontier Foundation. Retrieved April 8, 2014, from https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2007/10/eff-tests-agree-ap-comcast-forging-packets-to-interfere
Fiber vs. Cable vs. DSL – What you Need to Know. (2012, January 14). Fiber for All. Retrieved March 29, 2014, from http://fiberforall.org/fiber-vs-cable-vs-dsl
Fiber-optic communication. (2014, April 23). Wikipedia. Retrieved April 27, 2014, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fiber-optic_communication
Franken, A. (2014, February 27). Open Letter to the FCC. Al Franken, Senator for Minnesota. Retrieved April 8, 2014, from http://www.franken.senate.gov/files/letter/
Gannes, L. (2013, October 17). Google “Closing In” on Unified Product Experience, Says Soon-to-Be MIA Larry Page. AllThingsD. Retrieved April 27, 2014, from http://allthingsd.com/20131017/google-closing-in-on-unified-product-experience-says-larry-page/
Google Q1 2013 Earnings Call. (2013, April 22). YouTube. Retrieved April 2, 2014, from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JGI2TMQGdJ4&feature=share&list=UU9RZ
HiggenBotham, S. (2012, July 26). The economics of Google Fiber and what it means for U.S. broadband. Gigaom. Retrieved April 2, 2014, from http://gigaom.com/2012/07/26/the-economics-of-google-fiber-and-what-it-means-for-u-s-broadband/
Honan, M. (2011, August 15). Why the Government Won't Protect You from Getting Screwed by Your Cable Company. Gizmodo. Retrieved March 31, 2014, from http://gizmodo.com/5830956/why-the-government-wont-protect-you-from-getting-screwed-by-your-cable-company/all
Long, E. (2010, February 18). Is broadband internet access a public utility?. The LAMP. Retrieved March 19, 2014, from http://www.thelampnyc.org/2010/02/18/is-broadband-internet-access-a-public-utility/
McDonald, M. (2011, February 21). Home internet May Get Even Faster in South Korea. New York Times. Retrieved March 29, 2014, from http://www.nytimes.com/2011/02/22/technology/22iht-broadband22.html
Mitchell, D. (2013, August 9). Cable internet. CNN Money. Retrieved March 31, 2014, from http://tech.fortune.cnn.com/tag/cable-internet/
National Cable & Telecommunications Association v. Brand X internet Services. (2014, March 13). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 22:52, April 6, 2014, from http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Cable_%26_Telecommunications_Association_v._Brand_X_Internet_Services&oldid=599394600
NCTA. (2014, January 27). Why It’s a Good Thing That Broadband Isn’t a Common Carrier. Cable Tech Talk. Retrieved April 6, 2014, from https://www.ncta.com/platform/public-policy/why-its-a-good-thing-that-broadband-isnt-a-common-carrier/
Netflix. (2014, January 22). Q4 13 Letter to Shareholders. Quarterly Earnings Reports. Retrieved February 24, 2014, from http://files.shareholder.com/downloads/NFLX/3078252510x0x720306/119321bc-89c3-4306-93ac-93c02da2354f/Q4%2013%20Letter%20to%20shareholders.pdf
Page, L. (2009, December 31). 2009 Founders' Letter. Google Investor Relations. Retrieved April 2, 2014, from https://investor.google.com/corporate/2009/founders-letter.html
Reed, B. (2007, October 26). Net Neutrality vs. Tiered Services. Network World. Retrieved April 9, 2014, from http://www.networkworld.com/news/2007/102607-arguments-net-neutrality- tiered-services. html
Quijano, F., & Quijano, Y. (2007, December 2). Market Power: Monopoly and Monopsony. Dickinson State University. Retrieved April 27, 2014, from http://www2.dsu.nodak.edu/users/fernando/PrenticeHall/Pindyck_7e/corrected/ch10_07_29_08.ppt
Telecommunications Act of 1996, USC 42 §§ 652
Yglesias, M. (2013, March 22). No Good Answer on Utilities. Slate Magazine. Retrieved March 31, 2014, from http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/201
{% endhighlight %}
